# UPF-modeling
Macrosimulation comparative assessment model for all-cause mortality impact from ultra-processed food consumption. Baseline and counterfactual inputs must be added to the "Inputs" folder and uncertainty intervals area calculated using the Ersatz add-on. Ersataz outputs must be copied from the add-on and pasted to the "CodeStochastic" folder (ordered by the "CODES" variable). Model outputs are displayed in the "MC Results" folder.
Comparative risk assessment analysis
The comparative risk assessment model was developed and validated for estimating the impact of ultra-processed food consumption on all-cause mortality in Brazil. The model can be adapted to different countries using similar inputs to specific realities (population, mortality and food consumption). By addressing all-cause mortality, the model is intended to estimate the total burden of ultra-processed foods and support research on food policies intended to reduce ultra-processed food consumption and compare different scenarios of changes in diet.
The first step of the modeling is to estimate the estimated relative risks for all-cause mortality within each sex-and-age-stratum assuming that the equivalent to the theoretical minimum risk exposure level for ultra-processed foods consumption would be zero and considering discrete intervals of 0.1% of contribution of ultra-processed foods to total energy intake from 0.0% (RR=1.00) to 35.7% (RR=1.25), based on the summary relative risk from a recent meta-analysis and the available distribution of the contribution of ultra-processed foods to total energy intake (3), and extrapolated the RR for contributions above 35.7%. 
The distribution of the relative risks was considered log-linear for the interval so that the increase in the contribution of ultra-processed foods to total energy intake corresponded an equivalent increase in the RR for all-cause mortality, based on an increase in the natural logarithm of the relative risk of outcome in age a per 0.1% increase in the consumption of ultra-processed foods
Then, similarly to other validated macrosimulation models that address dietary risk factors, we modelled the distribution of UPF consumption using a log-linear function for the mean contribution of ultra-processed foods to total energy intake of the diet and its standard deviation and the national population.
We utilized estimates of the total number of deaths in Brazil during 2019 from the National Information System of Mortality (SIM/SUS). The averted deaths in each counterfactual scenario were computed by multiplying an age- and sex specific PAF by the baseline total number of deaths for the same stratum. For each scenario, the model generated the total numbers of deaths prevented or postponed as outputs. 
As modeled estimations of the impact of ultra-processed food consumption, the results were presented for Brazilian adults aged 30 to 79 years for 2019, rounded to 2 significant digits (uncertainty intervals, UI 95%, were not rounded). The outcomes for individuals with less than 30 years of age were excluded from the analysis because of the possible lag-time between changing dietary risk factors, such as UPF intake, and disease outcomes and also excluded the individuals over 70 years of age to account only for the premature deaths attributable to UPF intake.
Considering the uncertainty of outcomes in the model, probabilistic sensitivity analysis is recommended in order to explore the potential effects of reducing ultra-processed food consumption on all-cause mortality. Probabilistic sensitivity analysis requires a stochastic (random) variation of parameters based on the sizes of the effects obtained from the literature, as using Monte Carlo simulations. By using this methodology, the model results are recalculated iteratively and uncertainty intervals of 95% (UI 95%) are generated for the median using the bootstrap percentile method. 
The parameter uncertainty in all modelled estimates was quantified using Monte Carlo iterations with the Ersatz program (n = 5,000). For each simulation, the simulation works thorough producing a draw from the distributions of a) baseline contribution of ultra-processed foods to total energy intake of the diet, b) the relative risks of UPF intake and all-cause mortality, c) the current number of deaths. Each set of draws were used to calculate PIF and averted events of each outcome for each age-sex stratum and results were reported for the 50th, 2.5th and 97.5th percentiles of estimates across all simulations as the central estimate and 95% uncertainty intervals (UI), respectively.
The robustness of our model was assessed through deterministic sensitivity analyses, by changing key model assumptions and inputs. We evaluated the impact of lower or higher minimum and maximum theoretical minimum risk exposure level for the contribution of ultra-processed foods to total energy intake and RR for all-cause mortality (10.0%±4.1% and 12.0%±5.0% or 20.0%±8.2% and 24.0%±10.6%, respectively). Lastly, we explored lower and higher relative risks for UPF intake and all-cause mortality (10% differences) than estimated in the primary model.
